<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<task id="task" shellPackage="technicalContent" shellName="task">
    <title>Building a bird house</title>
    <shortdesc>Building a birdhouse is a perfect activity 
        for adults to share with their children or grandchildren. 
        It can be used to teach about birds, as well as the proper use of tools.
    </shortdesc>
        <prolog><metadata>
        </metadata></prolog>
    <taskbody>
      <prereq>To build a sound birdhouse, you will need a complete set of tools:
        <ul><li>hand saw</li>
          <li>hammer ... </li>
        </ul></prereq>
      <context>Birdhouses provide safe locations for birds to build nests and raise their young. They also provide shelter during cold and rainy spells.</context>
        <steps>
            <step><cmd>Lay out the dimensions for the birdhouse elements.</cmd></step>
            <step><cmd>Cut the elements to size.</cmd></step>
            <step><cmd>Drill a 1 1/2" diameter hole for the bird entrance on the front.</cmd>
                <info>You need to look at the drawing for the correct placement of the 
                    hole.</info></step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Select <uicontrol>Shut Down</uicontrol> from the
              <uicontrol>File</uicontrol> Menu.</cmd>
            <steptroubleshooting>If a problem with the computer prevents you from choosing 
              Shut Down—for example, if the computer “freezes” so that the pointer does 
              not respond to the trackpad—you can turn off the computer by holding down 
              the Control, Option, Command, and Power On keys at the same time.
            </steptroubleshooting>
          </step>
          <step>
            <cmd>Select the element for which you want to assign a conditional-
              processing attribute, and, in the <wintitle>Attributes</wintitle>
              window, select the conditional-processing attribute.</cmd>
            <stepresult>The permissible values for the attribute are displayed in a
              drop-down list.
            </stepresult>
            <steptroubleshooting>If the list of controlled values is not displayed, 
              ensure that the root map is opened in the
              <wintitle>DITA Maps Manager</wintitle> window.
            </steptroubleshooting>
          </step>
        </steps>
        <result>You now have a beautiful new birdhouse!</result>
      <tasktroubleshooting>If the <uicontrol>small espresso</uicontrol>
        button is not lit, recycle the unit by turning 
        the external <uicontrol>Power</uicontrol> off 
        and on.
      </tasktroubleshooting>
      <postreq>Now find a good place to mount it.</postreq>
    </taskbody>
</task>
