<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="../../../../../src/1.3/rng/technicalContent/rng/generalTask.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?>
<task id="task">
    <title>Building a bird house</title>
    <shortdesc>Building a birdhouse is a perfect activity 
        for adults to share with their children or grandchildren. 
        It can be used to teach about birds, as well as the proper use of tools.
    </shortdesc>
  <prolog>
    <change-historylist></change-historylist>
  </prolog>
    <taskbody>
        <context>Birdhouses provide safe locations for birds to build nests and raise their young. They also provide shelter during cold and rainy spells.</context>
        <prereq>To build a sound birdhouse, you will need a complete set of tools:
            <ul><li>hand saw</li>
                <li>hammer ... </li>
            </ul></prereq>
        <steps>
            <step><cmd>Lay out the dimensions for the birdhouse elements.</cmd></step>
            <step><cmd>Cut the elements to size.</cmd></step>
            <step><cmd>Drill a 1 1/2" diameter hole for the bird entrance on the front.</cmd>
                <info>You need to look at the drawing for the correct placement of the 
                    hole.</info></step>
           <step>
    <cmd>Select <uicontrol>Perform system backup</uicontrol></cmd>
    <stepresult>
      <p>The message <systemoutput>Backup successfully
        completed</systemoutput> displays.</p>
    </stepresult>
    <steptroubleshooting>
      <p>If an error message displays during the system backup,
        locate the error ID in the <cite>Troubleshooting Guide
        </cite> and follow the instructions there.</p>
    </steptroubleshooting>
  </step>
        </steps>
        <result>You now have a beautiful new birdhouse!</result>
 <tasktroubleshooting>
    <p>If the User Type menu does not display the additions, try
      one or more of the following:
      <ul>
        <li>Refresh the page</li>
        <li>Verify that <wintitle>Add Types</wintitle> is not
          still open; if so, go to it and press
          <uicontrol>OK</uicontrol>.</li>
      </ul>
    </p>
  </tasktroubleshooting>
      <example>
        <p>The example</p>
      </example>
      <postreq>Now find a good place to mount it.</postreq>
    </taskbody>
</task>
