<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="rng_tutorial_relax_ng_document_shell__constraints__and_modules_tutorial">
    <title>RELAX NG Document Shell, Constraints, and Specializations Tutorial</title>
  <shortdesc>A tutorial guide to creating document type shells, constraints, and specializations
    using RELAX NG.</shortdesc>
    <body>
        <p>These tutorials walk you through the process of creating your own RELAX NG (RNG) document
      type shells, constraints, and specializations.</p>
    <p>RELAX NG is an OASIS standard for XML document grammars that provides the best fit to DITA's
      document type definition requirements. As an XML-based format it is easier to work with than
      DTDs. The way RELAX NG works is easier to understand and use than XSD, especially in the area
      of constraints and content model extension. In particular, RELAX NG makes it about as easy as
      it can be to add and remove domains from your document type shells and makes it much easier to
      define constraints than with either DTD or XSD.</p>
    <p>The RELAX NG converter tool makes it easy to generate conforming DITA DTD shells,
      constraints, and specialization modules for use with tools that do not yet support RELAX NG
      directly. The RELAX NG converter also generates XSDs (with some limitations) for use with
      tools that require XSDs.</p>
    <p>This tutorial uses files from the <filepath>resources/</filepath> directory under the
        <filepath>rng-tutorial/</filepath> directory in the dtd-rng-converter project source. These
      resources are also packaged as a separate Zip file in the dtd-rng-converter release package
      for your convenience.</p>
    </body>
</topic>
