<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE topic PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Topic//EN" "topic.dtd">
<topic id="topic_bcz_1kj_gt">
  <title>Getting Started With the DITA RNG Converter</title>
  <body>
    <p>The DITA RELAX NG (RNG) converter generates conforming DITA DTD and XSD grammars from conforming RELAX NG grammars.</p>
    <p>It can do any of the following:<ul
      id="ul_iw2_fkj_gt">
      <li>Generate DTD document type shells from RNG shells.</li>
      <li>Generate DTD vocabulary modules from RNG vocabulary modules</li>
      <li>Generate DTD constraint modules from RNG constraint modules (with some limitations)</li>
      <li>Generate XSD document type shells from RNG shells.</li>
      <li>Generate XSD vocabulary modules from RNG vocabulary modules</li>
      <li>For simple cases, generate XSD constraint modules from RNG constraint modules</li>
      </ul></p>
    <p>To use the transformer you need to have RNG document type shells and, if you are converting your own specialization or constraint modules, those modules as well. All the module references from the shells must be resolvable, presumably because you've packaged them into an Open Toolkit plugin that hooks up all the catalogs or otherwise created a local environment where all the references can be resolved using normal XML processing.</p>
    <p>The Ant scripts require that a DITA Open Toolkit installation be available in order to have
      access to the OASIS-defined RELAX NG modules. You should use the latest DITA Open Toolkit
      version available in order to ensure you have the latest RELAX NG files.</p>
    <p>Alternatively, you can get the RELAX NG files from the DITA Technical Committee materials as
      provided through the OASIS Web site. However, the latest Open Toolkit should reflect the
      most-current versions of the OASIS-provided RELAX NG grammars.</p>
    <p>The dita-rng-converter project includes sample RELAX NG document type shells, vocabulary
      modules, and constraint modules in the <filepath>test</filepath> directory. You can use these
      samples to experiment with the RELAX NG converter. All the examples in this document reflect
      the test samples. You should be able to run the commands shown in the various command examples
      yourself.</p>
    <p>Note that longer examples use backslashes ("\") to indicate line continuation for long
      command lines. On Linux and OS X those command examples should work if pasted directly into a
      command window (as long as there are no blank spaces following the "\" characters). On Windows
      you may need to manually create a single line in order to run the command.</p>
  </body>
</topic>
